.\" elispall(1) — comprehensive all-in-one man page for elisprs
.\" Modeled after zshall(1): every man page in one document.
.\" Render with:  man -l man/man1/elispall.1
.\" Install:      cp man/man1/elispall.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/
.TH ELISPALL 1 "2026-06-28" "elisprs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
elispall \- the elisprs comprehensive reference (invocation, reader, special
forms, standard library, architecture, milestone status, roadmap)
.SH OVERVIEW
This is the all-in-one
.B elisprs
reference. For the concise command page see
.BR elisp (1).
.PP
.B elisprs
runs Emacs Lisp (\fB.el\fR) as standalone programs. It is built to become the
fifth language hosted on the
.B fusevm
bytecode VM, after
.BR zshrs ", " stryke ", " awkrs ", and " vimlrs .
At milestone 1 it executes on a self-contained tree-walk evaluator; the fusevm
lowering is the milestone-2 seam.
.SH INVOCATION
.B elisp
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR | \fB\-e\fR \fIPROGRAM\fR]
.PP
See
.BR elisp (1)
for the full option list:
.BR \-e / \-\-eval ,
.BR \-\-lsp ,
.BR \-\-dap ,
.BR \-\-aot ,
.BR \-V / \-\-version ,
.BR \-h / \-\-help .
With no arguments a REPL is started (parenthesis-balanced multi-line input;
Ctrl-D exits).
.SH "DESIGN: REUSE / OWN SPLIT"
Emacs Lisp is a Lisp-2 (separate value and function cells per symbol) and is, by
default, dynamically scoped. No general-purpose embeddable Lisp provides those,
so elisprs splits the problem:
.TP
.B Reused \(em data model
The
.B rust_lisp
crate (MIT) supplies \fBValue\fR/\fBList\fR/\fBSymbol\fR. Function objects ride
in \fBValue::Foreign(Rc<dyn Any>)\fR, so closures, macros, and subrs are added
without forking the value enum.
.TP
.B Own \(em the reader
rust_lisp's number-greedy tokenizer splits \fB1+\fR/\fB1\-\fR and lacks
\fB#'\fR, \fB?c\fR, and dotted pairs.
.I src/reader.rs
is a small elisp-correct reader emitting rust_lisp values.
.TP
.B Own \(em the semantics
The obarray (value + function cells), dynamic binding (a specstack that saves and
restores prior value cells), the special forms, and the standard library are all
in-crate. rust_lisp's Lisp-1, lexical evaluator is not used.
.SH "READER SYNTAX"
Integers, floats, strings with escapes, symbols (including \fB1+\fR, \fB1\-\fR,
\fB<=\fR, \fB:keywords\fR), \fBnil\fR/\fBt\fR, \fB'\fRquote, \fB#'\fRfunction,
\fB?c\fR character literals, and \fB;\fR comments.
.SH "SPECIAL FORMS"
.B quote function lambda progn prog1 if when unless cond and or while setq let
.B let* defun defmacro defvar defconst condition-case unwind-protect
.PP
Lambda lists accept \fB&optional\fR and \fB&rest\fR. Macros expand and are
re-evaluated.
.B condition-case
matches the \fBerror\fR umbrella and specific error symbols.
.SH "STANDARD LIBRARY (~65 SUBRS)"
.TP
.B Arithmetic
+ \- * / % mod 1+ 1\- abs max min = /= < > <= >=
.TP
.B Lists
car cdr cons list append nth nthcdr reverse length member memq assoc assq
.TP
.B Predicates
eq eql equal null not numberp integerp floatp stringp symbolp consp listp atom
functionp
.TP
.B Symbols / cells
set symbol-value symbol-function fset boundp fboundp symbol-name intern
make-symbol
.TP
.B Strings
concat string= string-equal string< upcase downcase number-to-string
string-to-number
.TP
.B I/O and format
format message princ prin1 print terpri
.TP
.B Functional
funcall apply mapcar mapc identity
.SH "PATH TO FUSEVM (MILESTONE 2)"
The lowering follows the same frontend pattern as
.IR strykelang/strykelang/fusevm_native.rs :
.IP 1. 4
Add \fBValue::{Cons, Symbol}\fR to \fBfusevm/src/value.rs\fR and a dynamic-binding
stack to the \fBVM\fR struct \(em the one invasive core change.
.IP 2. 4
Reserve an elisp \fBOp::Extended(id, arg)\fR range; register a handler via
\fBvm.set_extension_handler(...)\fR for quote, funcall, special-var bind, and
cons navigation.
.IP 3. 4
Lower each top-level form in \fBcompiler.rs\fR; lambda bodies become sub-chunks.
.IP 4. 4
Bind the subr library through \fBvm.register_builtin(...)\fR.
.PP
The three-tier Cranelift JIT and the
.B \-\-aot
path (via \fBfusevm::aot::compile_object\fR) then come for free.
.SH LIMITATIONS
No dotted pairs, backquote/unquote, \fBlexical-binding\fR, or
\fBsetcar\fR/\fBsetcdr\fR at milestone 1; unsupported reader syntax errors
loudly. Not buffer-aware.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR elisp (1).
Reference and engineering report: https://menketechnologies.github.io/elisprs/ .
.SH AUTHOR
MenkeTechnologies <https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies>.
.SH LICENSE
MIT OR Apache-2.0. Bundles rust_lisp (MIT).
