.\" Manpage for elisp (elisprs).
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/elisprs to correct errors or omissions.
.TH ELISP 1 "2026-07-19" "elisprs 0.1.7" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
elisp \- Emacs Lisp interpreter (run .el outside Emacs; Lisp-2 obarray with dynamic binding, on the rust_lisp value model)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B elisp
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIFILE\fR | \fB\-e\fR \fIPROGRAM\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B elisp
evaluates Emacs Lisp as a standalone program. It is the command-line front
end of
.BR elisprs ,
an Emacs Lisp runtime in Rust built to become a frontend for the
.B fusevm
bytecode VM (the engine behind
.BR zshrs ,
.BR stryke ,
.BR awkrs ,
and
.BR vimlrs ).
.PP
Emacs Lisp is a Lisp-2 \(em every symbol carries a separate value cell and
function cell \(em and is, by default, dynamically scoped. elisprs reuses the
.B rust_lisp
crate (MIT) for its \fBValue\fR/\fBList\fR/\fBSymbol\fR data model, but the
reader, the obarray, dynamic binding, the special forms, and the standard
library are its own; rust_lisp's Lisp-1, lexically scoped evaluator is not used.
.PP
At milestone 1 the program runs on a self-contained tree-walk evaluator. The
.B fusevm
lowering is staged in
.I src/compiler.rs
and is not yet wired; it backs the
.B \-\-aot
path.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.I FILE
Evaluate the forms in \fIFILE\fR (typically a \fB.el\fR file) in order.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-eval " " \fIPROGRAM\fR
Evaluate \fIPROGRAM\fR and print the value of the last form.
.TP
.B \-\-repl
Start the interactive reedline REPL: a utop-style line editor with Tab
completion over the special-form and subr wordlist, a live ASCII stats banner,
emacs/vi edit modes (\fBELISPRS_REPL_MODE\fR or \fI~/.elisprs/config.toml\fR),
and history at \fI~/.elisprs/history\fR. With no arguments on an interactive
terminal, \fBelisp\fR launches this REPL automatically; piped input falls back
to a plain line-buffered reader.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Run the language server over stdio. Stub at milestone 1.
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Run the debug adapter over stdio. Stub at milestone 1.
.TP
.BR \-\-aot " " \fIFILE\fR " " \fB\-o\fR " " \fIOUT\fR
Ahead-of-time compile \fIFILE\fR to a native object \fIOUT\fR via
\fBfusevm::aot::compile_object\fR. Requires the milestone-2 lowering; reports a
not-implemented signal until then.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.PP
With no arguments,
.B elisp
starts a read-eval-print loop. Input is accumulated until parentheses balance,
so multi-line forms work; Ctrl-D exits.
.SH LANGUAGE
Reader syntax: integers, floats, strings with escapes, symbols (including
\fB1+\fR / \fB1\-\fR / \fB<=\fR / \fB:keywords\fR), \fBnil\fR / \fBt\fR,
\fB'\fRquote, \fB#'\fRfunction, \fB?c\fR character literals, and \fB;\fR comments.
.PP
Special forms: \fBquote function lambda progn prog1 if when unless cond and or
while setq let let* defun defmacro defvar defconst condition-case
unwind-protect\fR.
A standard library of roughly 65 subrs covers lists, arithmetic, strings,
predicates, I/O/format, and functional operators.
.SH LIMITATIONS
Milestone 1 does not support dotted pairs \fB(a . b)\fR, backquote/unquote,
\fBlexical-binding\fR, or \fBsetcar\fR/\fBsetcdr\fR. Unsupported reader syntax
errors loudly rather than being silently misread. The interpreter is not
buffer-aware (no buffers, point, or markers).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B elisp
exits 0 on success and non-zero if a file cannot be read or evaluation signals
an uncaught error.
.SH EXAMPLES
Evaluate an expression:
.PP
.RS
.nf
elisp \-e '(mapcar #'\(aq1+ \(aq(1 2 3))'   \(rh (2 3 4)
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run a file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
elisp examples/demo.el
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR elispall (1).
Reference and engineering report: https://menketechnologies.github.io/elisprs/ .
.B fusevm:
https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/fusevm .
.SH AUTHOR
MenkeTechnologies <https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies>.
.SH LICENSE
MIT OR Apache-2.0. Bundles rust_lisp (MIT).
